MAN(1)                               Manual pager utils                              MAN(1)

NAME
       man - an interface to the system reference manuals

SYNOPSIS
       man [man options] [[section] page ...] ...
       man -k [apropos options] regexp ...
       man -K [man options] [section] term ...
       man -f [whatis options] page ...
       man -l [man options] file ...
       man -w|-W [man options] page ...

DESCRIPTION
       man  is  the system's manual pager.  Each page argument given to man is normally the
       name of a program, utility or function.  The manual page  associated  with  each  of
       these  arguments  is  then found and displayed.  A section, if provided, will direct
       man to look only in that section of the manual.  The default action is to search  in
       all  of  the available sections following a pre-defined order (see DEFAULTS), and to
       show only the first page found, even if page exists in several sections.

       The table below shows the section numbers of the manual followed  by  the  types  of
       pages they contain.

       1   Executable programs or shell commands
       2   System calls (functions provided by the kernel)
       3   Library calls (functions within program libraries)
       4   Special files (usually found in /dev)
       5   File formats and conventions, e.g. /etc/passwd
       6   Games
       7   Miscellaneous (including macro packages and conventions), e.g. man(7), groff(7)
       8   System administration commands (usually only for root)
       9   Kernel routines [Non standard]

       A manual page consists of several sections.

       Conventional  section  names include NAME, SYNOPSIS, CONFIGURATION, DESCRIPTION, OP‐
       TIONS, EXIT STATUS, RETURN VALUE, ERRORS,  ENVIRONMENT,  FILES,  VERSIONS,  CONFORM‐
       ING TO, NOTES, BUGS, EXAMPLE, AUTHORS, and SEE ALSO.

       The  following  conventions apply to the SYNOPSIS section and can be used as a guide
       in other sections.

       bold text          type exactly as shown.
       italic text        replace with appropriate argument.
       [-abc]             any or all arguments within [ ] are optional.
       -a|-b              options delimited by | cannot be used together.
       argument ...       argument is repeatable.
       [expression] ...   entire expression within [ ] is repeatable.

       Exact rendering may vary depending on the output device.   For  instance,  man  will
       usually not be able to render italics when running in a terminal, and will typically
       use underlined or coloured text instead.

       The command or function illustration is a pattern that should match all possible in‐
       vocations.   In  some  cases it is advisable to illustrate several exclusive invoca‐
       tions as is shown in the SYNOPSIS section of this manual page.

EXAMPLES
       man ls
           Display the manual page for the item (program) ls.

       man man.7
           Display the manual page for macro package man from section 7.  (This is  an  al‐
           ternative spelling of "man 7 man".)

       man 'man(7)'
           Display  the manual page for macro package man from section 7.  (This is another
           alternative spelling of "man 7 man".  It may be more convenient when copying and
           pasting  cross-references  to manual pages.  Note that the parentheses must nor‐
           mally be quoted to protect them from the shell.)

       man -a intro
           Display, in succession, all of the available intro manual pages contained within
           the  manual.   It is possible to quit between successive displays or skip any of
           them.

       man -t bash | lpr -Pps
           Format the manual page for bash into the default troff or groff format and  pipe
           it to the printer named ps.  The default output for groff is usually PostScript.
           man --help should advise as to which processor is bound to the -t option.

       man -l -Tdvi ./foo.1x.gz > ./foo.1x.dvi
           This command will decompress and format the nroff source manual page ./foo.1x.gz
           into  a  device  independent (dvi) file.  The redirection is necessary as the -T
           flag causes output to be directed to stdout with no pager.  The output could  be
           viewed  with a program such as xdvi or further processed into PostScript using a
           program such as dvips.

       man -k printf
           Search the short descriptions and manual page names for the  keyword  printf  as
           regular expression.  Print out any matches.  Equivalent to apropos printf.

       man -f smail
           Lookup the manual pages referenced by smail and print out the short descriptions
           of any found.  Equivalent to whatis smail.

OVERVIEW
       Many options are available to man in order to give as much flexibility  as  possible
       to  the user.  Changes can be made to the search path, section order, output proces‐
       sor, and other behaviours and operations detailed below.

       If set, various environment variables are interrogated to determine the operation of
       man.   It  is possible to set the "catch-all" variable $MANOPT to any string in com‐
       mand line format, with the exception that any spaces used as part of an option's ar‐
       gument  must  be escaped (preceded by a backslash).  man will parse $MANOPT prior to
       parsing its own command line.  Those options requiring an argument will be  overrid‐
       den  by the same options found on the command line.  To reset all of the options set
       in $MANOPT, -D can be specified as the initial command line option.  This will allow
       man  to  "forget"  about  the options specified in $MANOPT, although they must still
       have been valid.

       Manual pages are normally stored in  nroff(1)  format  under  a  directory  such  as
       /usr/share/man.   In some installations, there may also be preformatted cat pages to
       improve performance.  See manpath(5) for details of where these files are stored.

       This package supports manual pages in multiple languages, controlled by your locale.
       If  your  system did not set this up for you automatically, then you may need to set
       $LC_MESSAGES, $LANG, or another system-dependent environment  variable  to  indicate
       your preferred locale, usually specified in the POSIX format:

       <language>[_<territory>[.<character-set>[,<version>]]]

       If the desired page is available in your locale, it will be displayed in lieu of the
       standard (usually American English) page.

       If you find that the translations supplied with this package are  not  available  in
       your  native  language  and  you would like to supply them, please contact the main‐
       tainer who will be coordinating such activity.

       Individual manual pages are normally written and maintained by  the  maintainers  of
       the  program, function, or other topic that they document, and are not included with
       this package.  If you find that a manual page is missing or inadequate,  please  re‐
       port that to the maintainers of the package in question.

       For  information  regarding other features and extensions available with this manual
       pager, please read the documents supplied with the package.

DEFAULTS
       The order of sections to search may be overridden by the environment variable  $MAN‐
       SECT  or  by the SECTION directive in /etc/manpath.config.  By default it is as fol‐
       lows:

              1 n l 8 3 2 3posix 3pm 3perl 3am 5 4 9 6 7

       The formatted manual page is displayed using a pager.  This can be  specified  in  a
       number of ways, or else will fall back to a default (see option -P for details).

       The  filters  are deciphered by a number of means.  Firstly, the command line option
       -p or the environment variable $MANROFFSEQ is interrogated.  If -p was not used  and
       the  environment  variable was not set, the initial line of the nroff file is parsed
       for a preprocessor string.  To contain a valid preprocessor string, the  first  line
       must resemble

       '\" <string>

       where string can be any combination of letters described by option -p below.

       If none of the above methods provide any filter information, a default set is used.

       A formatting pipeline is formed from the filters and the primary formatter (nroff or
       [tg]roff with -t) and executed.  Alternatively, if an executable program  mandb_nfmt
       (or  mandb_tfmt  with  -t)  exists in the man tree root, it is executed instead.  It
       gets passed the manual source file, the preprocessor string, and optionally the  de‐
       vice specified with -T or -E as arguments.

OPTIONS
       Non-argument  options that are duplicated either on the command line, in $MANOPT, or
       both, are not harmful.  For options that require an argument, each duplication  will
       override the previous argument value.

   General options
       -C file, --config-file=file
              Use this user configuration file rather than the default of ~/.manpath.

       -d, --debug
              Print debugging information.

       -D, --default
              This  option is normally issued as the very first option and resets man's be‐
              haviour to its default.  Its use is to reset those options that may have been
              set in $MANOPT.  Any options that follow -D will have their usual effect.

       --warnings[=warnings]
              Enable warnings from groff.  This may be used to perform sanity checks on the
              source text of manual pages.  warnings is a comma-separated list  of  warning
              names;  if it is not supplied, the default is "mac".  See the “Warnings” node
              in info groff for a list of available warning names.

   Main modes of operation
       -f, --whatis
              Equivalent to whatis.  Display a short description from the manual  page,  if
              available.  See whatis(1) for details.

       -k, --apropos
              Equivalent  to  apropos.   Search the short manual page descriptions for key‐
              words and display any matches.  See apropos(1) for details.

       -K, --global-apropos
              Search for text in all manual pages.  This is a brute-force  search,  and  is
              likely  to take some time; if you can, you should specify a section to reduce
              the number of pages that need to be searched.  Search  terms  may  be  simple
              strings (the default), or regular expressions if the --regex option is used.

              Note  that  this  searches  the sources of the manual pages, not the rendered
              text, and so may include false positives  due  to  things  like  comments  in
              source files.  Searching the rendered text would be much slower.

       -l, --local-file
              Activate  "local"  mode.   Format  and  display local manual files instead of
              searching through the system's manual collection.  Each manual page  argument
              will  be  interpreted  as an nroff source file in the correct format.  No cat
              file is produced.  If '-' is listed as one of the arguments,  input  will  be
              taken  from  stdin.   When this option is not used, and man fails to find the
              page required, before displaying the error message, it attempts to act as  if
              this option was supplied, using the name as a filename and looking for an ex‐
              act match.

       -w, --where, --path, --location
              Don't actually display the manual page, but do  print  the  location  of  the
              source  nroff  file  that would be formatted.  If the -a option is also used,
              then print the locations of all source files that match the search criteria.

       -W, --where-cat, --location-cat
              Don't actually display the manual page, but do print the location of the pre‐
              formatted  cat  file that would be displayed.  If the -a option is also used,
              then print the locations of all preformatted cat files that match the  search
              criteria.

              If  -w  and  -W are both used, then print both source file and cat file sepa‐
              rated by a space.  If all of -w, -W, and -a are used, then do this  for  each
              possible match.

       -c, --catman
              This option is not for general use and should only be used by the catman pro‐
              gram.

       -R encoding, --recode=encoding
              Instead of formatting the manual page in the usual  way,  output  its  source
              converted to the specified encoding.  If you already know the encoding of the
              source file, you can also use manconv(1) directly.  However, this option  al‐
              lows  you to convert several manual pages to a single encoding without having
              to explicitly state the encoding of each, provided that they were already in‐
              stalled in a structure similar to a manual page hierarchy.

              Consider  using  man-recode(1)  instead for converting multiple manual pages,
              since it has an interface designed for bulk conversion and  so  can  be  much
              faster.

   Finding manual pages
       -L locale, --locale=locale
              man  will  normally determine your current locale by a call to the C function
              setlocale(3) which interrogates various environment variables,  possibly  in‐
              cluding  $LC_MESSAGES  and  $LANG.   To  temporarily  override the determined
              value, use this option to supply a locale string directly to man.  Note  that
              it  will  not take effect until the search for pages actually begins.  Output
              such as the help message will always be displayed in the initially determined
              locale.

       -m system[,...], --systems=system[,...]
              If  this system has access to other operating system's manual pages, they can
              be accessed using this option.  To search for a manual page from NewOS's man‐
              ual page collection, use the option -m NewOS.

              The system specified can be a combination of comma delimited operating system
              names.  To include a search of the native operating  system's  manual  pages,
              include  the  system name man in the argument string.  This option will over‐
              ride the $SYSTEM environment variable.

       -M path, --manpath=path
              Specify an alternate manpath to use.  By default, man  uses  manpath  derived
              code to determine the path to search.  This option overrides the $MANPATH en‐
              vironment variable and causes option -m to be ignored.

              A path specified as a manpath must be the root of  a  manual  page  hierarchy
              structured into sections as described in the man-db manual (under "The manual
              page system").  To view manual pages outside such hierarchies, see the -l op‐
              tion.

       -S list, -s list, --sections=list
              The  given  list is a colon- or comma-separated list of sections, used to de‐
              termine which manual sections to search and in what order.  This option over‐
              rides the $MANSECT environment variable.  (The -s spelling is for compatibil‐
              ity with System V.)

       -e sub-extension, --extension=sub-extension
              Some systems incorporate large packages of manual pages, such as  those  that
              accompany  the  Tcl  package,  into  the  main manual page hierarchy.  To get
              around the problem of having two manual pages with  the  same  name  such  as
              exit(3),  the  Tcl  pages were usually all assigned to section l.  As this is
              unfortunate, it is now possible to put the pages in the correct section,  and
              to  assign  a  specific "extension" to them, in this case, exit(3tcl).  Under
              normal operation, man will display exit(3) in preference to  exit(3tcl).   To
              negotiate  this  situation and to avoid having to know which section the page
              you require resides in, it is now possible to give man a sub-extension string
              indicating  which  package the page must belong to.  Using the above example,
              supplying the option -e tcl to man will restrict the search to  pages  having
              an extension of *tcl.

       -i, --ignore-case
              Ignore case when searching for manual pages.  This is the default.

       -I, --match-case
              Search for manual pages case-sensitively.

       --regex
              Show  all  pages  with  any  part of either their names or their descriptions
              matching each page argument as a  regular  expression,  as  with  apropos(1).
              Since there is usually no reasonable way to pick a "best" page when searching
              for a regular expression, this option implies -a.

       --wildcard
              Show all pages with any part of either  their  names  or  their  descriptions
              matching  each  page argument using shell-style wildcards, as with apropos(1)
              --wildcard.  The page argument must match the entire name or description,  or
              match  on word boundaries in the description.  Since there is usually no rea‐
              sonable way to pick a "best" page when searching for a wildcard, this  option
              implies -a.

       --names-only
              If  the --regex or --wildcard option is used, match only page names, not page
              descriptions, as with whatis(1).  Otherwise, no effect.

       -a, --all
              By default, man will exit after displaying the most suitable manual  page  it
              finds.   Using  this  option  forces man to display all the manual pages with
              names that match the search criteria.

       -u, --update
              This option causes man to update its  database  caches  of  installed  manual
              pages.   This is only needed in rare situations, and it is normally better to
              run mandb(8) instead.

       --no-subpages
              By default, man will try to interpret pairs of manual page names given on the
              command  line  as equivalent to a single manual page name containing a hyphen
              or an underscore.  This supports the common pattern of programs  that  imple‐
              ment  a number of subcommands, allowing them to provide manual pages for each
              that can be accessed using similar syntax as would be used to invoke the sub‐
              commands themselves.  For example:

                $ man -aw git diff
                /usr/share/man/man1/git-diff.1.gz

              To disable this behaviour, use the --no-subpages option.

                $ man -aw --no-subpages git diff
                /usr/share/man/man1/git.1.gz
                /usr/share/man/man3/Git.3pm.gz
                /usr/share/man/man1/diff.1.gz

   Controlling formatted output
       -P pager, --pager=pager
              Specify  which output pager to use.  By default, man uses pager, falling back
              to cat if pager is not found or is not executable.  This option overrides the
              $MANPAGER  environment  variable, which in turn overrides the $PAGER environ‐
              ment variable.  It is not used in conjunction with -f or -k.

              The value may be a simple command name or a command with arguments,  and  may
              use shell quoting (backslashes, single quotes, or double quotes).  It may not
              use pipes to connect multiple commands; if  you  need  that,  use  a  wrapper
              script,  which may take the file to display either as an argument or on stan‐
              dard input.

       -r prompt, --prompt=prompt
              If a recent version of less is used as the pager, man will attempt to set its
              prompt and some sensible options.  The default prompt looks like

               Manual page name(sec) line x

              where name denotes the manual page name, sec denotes the section it was found
              under and x the current line number.  This is achieved by using the $LESS en‐
              vironment variable.

              Supplying  -r  with a string will override this default.  The string may con‐
              tain the text $MAN_PN which will be expanded to the name of the current  man‐
              ual  page and its section name surrounded by "(" and ")".  The string used to
              produce the default could be expressed as

              \ Manual\ page\ \$MAN_PN\ ?ltline\ %lt?L/%L.:
              byte\ %bB?s/%s..?\ (END):?pB\ %pB\\%..
              (press h for help or q to quit)

              It is broken into three lines here for the sake of readability only.  For its
              meaning see the less(1) manual page.  The prompt string is first evaluated by
              the shell.  All double quotes, back-quotes and backslashes in the prompt must
              be escaped by a preceding backslash.  The prompt string may end in an escaped
              $ which may be followed by further options for less.  By default man sets the
              -ix8 options.

              The  $MANLESS  environment  variable described below may be used to set a de‐
              fault prompt string if none is supplied on the command line.

       -7, --ascii
              When viewing a pure ascii(7) manual page on a 7 bit terminal or terminal emu‐
              lator, some characters may not display correctly when using the latin1(7) de‐
              vice description with GNU nroff.  This option allows pure ascii manual  pages
              to  be  displayed in ascii with the latin1 device.  It will not translate any
              latin1 text.  The following table  shows  the  translations  performed:  some
              parts  of  it may only be displayed properly when using GNU nroff's latin1(7)
              device.

              Description        Octal   latin1   ascii
              ──────────────────────────────────────────
              continuation hy‐    255      ‐        -
              phen
              bullet (middle      267      •        o
              dot)
              acute accent        264      ´        '
              multiplication      327      ×        x
              sign

              If  the  latin1  column  displays  correctly, your terminal may be set up for
              latin1 characters and this option is not necessary.  If the latin1 and  ascii
              columns are identical, you are reading this page using this option or man did
              not format this page using the latin1 device description.  If the latin1 col‐
              umn  is  missing  or corrupt, you may need to view manual pages with this op‐
              tion.

              This option is ignored when using options -t, -H, -T, or -Z and may  be  use‐
              less for nroff other than GNU's.

       -E encoding, --encoding=encoding
              Generate  output  for a character encoding other than the default.  For back‐
              ward compatibility, encoding may be an nroff device such as ascii, latin1, or
              utf8 as well as a true character encoding such as UTF-8.

       --no-hyphenation, --nh
              Normally,  nroff  will  automatically  hyphenate  text at line breaks even in
              words that do not contain hyphens, if it is necessary to do  so  to  lay  out
              words  on  a  line without excessive spacing.  This option disables automatic
              hyphenation, so words will only be hyphenated if  they  already  contain  hy‐
              phens.

              If  you  are  writing a manual page and simply want to prevent nroff from hy‐
              phenating a word at an inappropriate point, do not use this option, but  con‐
              sult the nroff documentation instead; for instance, you can put "\%" inside a
              word to indicate that it may be hyphenated at that point, or put "\%" at  the
              start of a word to prevent it from being hyphenated.

       --no-justification, --nj
              Normally, nroff will automatically justify text to both margins.  This option
              disables full justification, leaving justified only to the left margin, some‐
              times called "ragged-right" text.

              If you are writing a manual page and simply want to prevent nroff from justi‐
              fying certain paragraphs, do not use this option, but consult the nroff docu‐
              mentation  instead;  for  instance,  you can use the ".na", ".nf", ".fi", and
              ".ad" requests to temporarily disable adjusting and filling.

       -p string, --preprocessor=string
              Specify the sequence of preprocessors to run  before  nroff  or  troff/groff.
              Not  all  installations  will  have a full set of preprocessors.  Some of the
              preprocessors and the letters used to designate them are: eqn (e), grap  (g),
              pic (p), tbl (t), vgrind (v), refer (r).  This option overrides the $MANROFF‐
              SEQ environment variable.  zsoelim is always run as the very first preproces‐
              sor.

       -t, --troff
              Use  groff  -mandoc  to format the manual page to stdout.  This option is not
              required in conjunction with -H, -T, or -Z.

       -T[device], --troff-device[=device]
              This option is used to change groff (or possibly troff's) output to be  suit‐
              able for a device other than the default.  It implies -t.  Examples (provided
              with Groff-1.17) include dvi, latin1, ps, utf8, X75 and X100.

       -H[browser], --html[=browser]
              This option will cause groff to produce HTML output, and  will  display  that
              output in a web browser.  The choice of browser is determined by the optional
              browser argument if one is provided, by the $BROWSER environment variable, or
              by  a  compile-time default if that is unset (usually lynx).  This option im‐
              plies -t, and will only work with GNU troff.

       -X[dpi], --gxditview[=dpi]
              This option displays the output of groff in  a  graphical  window  using  the
              gxditview program.  The dpi (dots per inch) may be 75, 75-12, 100, or 100-12,
              defaulting to 75; the -12 variants use a 12-point base font.  This option im‐
              plies -T with the X75, X75-12, X100, or X100-12 device respectively.

       -Z, --ditroff
              groff  will  run  troff and then use an appropriate post-processor to produce
              output suitable for the chosen device.  If groff -mandoc is groff,  this  op‐
              tion  is  passed  to groff and will suppress the use of a post-processor.  It
              implies -t.

   Getting help
       -?, --help
              Print a help message and exit.

       --usage
              Print a short usage message and exit.

       -V, --version
              Display version information.

EXIT STATUS
       0      Successful program execution.

       1      Usage, syntax or configuration file error.

       2      Operational error.

       3      A child process returned a non-zero exit status.

       16     At least one of the pages/files/keywords didn't exist or wasn't matched.

ENVIRONMENT
       MANPATH
              If $MANPATH is set, its value is used as the path to search for manual pages.

       MANROFFOPT
              Every time man invokes the formatter (nroff, troff, or groff),  it  adds  the
              contents of $MANROFFOPT to the formatter's command line.

       MANROFFSEQ
              If  $MANROFFSEQ  is set, its value is used to determine the set of preproces‐
              sors to pass each manual page through.  The default preprocessor list is sys‐
              tem dependent.

       MANSECT
              If $MANSECT is set, its value is a colon-delimited list of sections and it is
              used to determine which manual sections to search and in what order.  The de‐
              fault  is  "1 n l 8 3 2 3posix 3pm 3perl 3am 5 4 9 6 7", unless overridden by
              the SECTION directive in /etc/manpath.config.

       MANPAGER, PAGER
              If $MANPAGER or $PAGER is set ($MANPAGER is used in preference), its value is
              used as the name of the program used to display the manual page.  By default,
              pager is used, falling back to cat if pager is  not  found  or  is  not  exe‐
              cutable.

              The  value  may be a simple command name or a command with arguments, and may
              use shell quoting (backslashes, single quotes, or double quotes).  It may not
              use  pipes  to  connect  multiple  commands;  if you need that, use a wrapper
              script, which may take the file to display either as an argument or on  stan‐
              dard input.

       MANLESS
              If  $MANLESS  is set, its value will be used as the default prompt string for
              the less pager, as if it had been passed using the -r option (so  any  occur‐
              rences  of  the text $MAN_PN will be expanded in the same way).  For example,
              if you want to set the prompt string unconditionally to “my  prompt  string”,
              set  $MANLESS  to  ‘-Psmy prompt string’.  Using the -r option overrides this
              environment variable.

       BROWSER
              If $BROWSER is set, its value is a colon-delimited list of commands, each  of
              which  in turn is used to try to start a web browser for man --html.  In each
              command, %s is replaced by a filename containing the HTML output from  groff,
              %%  is  replaced  by a single percent sign (%), and %c is replaced by a colon
              (:).

       SYSTEM If $SYSTEM is set, it will have the same effect as if it had  been  specified
              as the argument to the -m option.

       MANOPT If  $MANOPT  is set, it will be parsed prior to man's command line and is ex‐
              pected to be in a similar format.  As all of the other man specific  environ‐
              ment  variables can be expressed as command line options, and are thus candi‐
              dates for being included in $MANOPT it is expected that they will become  ob‐
              solete.   N.B.   All spaces that should be interpreted as part of an option's
              argument must be escaped.

       MANWIDTH
              If $MANWIDTH is set, its value is used as the line length  for  which  manual
              pages  should be formatted.  If it is not set, manual pages will be formatted
              with a line length appropriate to the current terminal (using  the  value  of
              $COLUMNS, and ioctl(2) if available, or falling back to 80 characters if nei‐
              ther is available).  Cat pages will only be saved when the default formatting
              can be used, that is when the terminal line length is between 66 and 80 char‐
              acters.

       MAN_KEEP_FORMATTING
              Normally, when output is not being directed to a terminal (such as to a  file
              or a pipe), formatting characters are discarded to make it easier to read the
              result without special tools.  However, if $MAN_KEEP_FORMATTING is set to any
              non-empty  value, these formatting characters are retained.  This may be use‐
              ful for wrappers around man that can interpret formatting characters.

       MAN_KEEP_STDERR
              Normally, when output is being directed to a terminal (usually to  a  pager),
              any  error output from the command used to produce formatted versions of man‐
              ual pages is discarded to avoid interfering with the pager's  display.   Pro‐
              grams such as groff often produce relatively minor error messages about typo‐
              graphical problems such as poor alignment, which are unsightly and  generally
              confusing  when  displayed  along  with the manual page.  However, some users
              want to see them anyway, so, if $MAN_KEEP_STDERR  is  set  to  any  non-empty
              value, error output will be displayed as usual.

       LANG, LC_MESSAGES
              Depending  on system and implementation, either or both of $LANG and $LC_MES‐
              SAGES will be interrogated for the current message locale.  man will  display
              its messages in that locale (if available).  See setlocale(3) for precise de‐
              tails.

FILES
       /etc/manpath.config
              man-db configuration file.

       /usr/share/man
              A global manual page hierarchy.

SEE ALSO
       apropos(1), groff(1), less(1),  manpath(1),  nroff(1),  troff(1),  whatis(1),  zsoe‐
       lim(1), manpath(5), man(7), catman(8), mandb(8)

       Documentation  for  some packages may be available in other formats, such as info(1)
       or HTML.

HISTORY
       1990, 1991 – Originally written by John W. Eaton (jwe@che.utexas.edu).

       Dec 23 1992: Rik Faith (faith@cs.unc.edu) applied bug fixes supplied by Willem  Kas‐
       dorp (wkasdo@nikhefk.nikef.nl).

       30th April 1994 – 23rd February 2000: Wilf. (G.Wilford@ee.surrey.ac.uk) has been de‐
       veloping and maintaining this package with the help of a few dedicated people.

       30th October 1996 – 30th March 2001: Fabrizio  Polacco  <fpolacco@debian.org>  main‐
       tained  and  enhanced  this package for the Debian project, with the help of all the
       community.

       31st March 2001 – present day: Colin Watson <cjwatson@debian.org> is now  developing
       and maintaining man-db.

2.9.1                                    2020-02-25                                  MAN(1)
MAN(7)                           Linux Programmer's Manual                           MAN(7)

NAME
       man - macros to format man pages

SYNOPSIS
       groff -Tascii -man file ...

       groff -Tps -man file ...

       man [section] title

DESCRIPTION
       This  manual  page  explains  the  groff an.tmac macro package (often called the man
       macro package).  This macro package should be used by  developers  when  writing  or
       porting  man  pages  for Linux.  It is fairly compatible with other versions of this
       macro package, so porting man pages should not be a major  problem  (exceptions  in‐
       clude  the  NET-2  BSD  release, which uses a totally different macro package called
       mdoc; see mdoc(7)).

       Note that NET-2 BSD mdoc man pages can be used with groff simply by  specifying  the
       -mdoc option instead of the -man option.  Using the -mandoc option is, however, rec‐
       ommended, since this will automatically detect which macro package is in use.

       For conventions that should be employed when writing man pages for  the  Linux  man-
       pages package, see man-pages(7).

   Title line
       The first command in a man page (after comment lines, that is, lines that start with
       .\") should be

              .TH title section date source manual

       For details of the arguments that should be supplied to the  TH  command,  see  man-
       pages(7).

       Note that BSD mdoc-formatted pages begin with the Dd command, not the TH command.

   Sections
       Sections are started with .SH followed by the heading name.

       The  only  mandatory  heading is NAME, which should be the first section and be fol‐
       lowed on the next line by a one-line description of the program:

              .SH NAME
              item \- description

       It is extremely important that this format is followed, and that there  is  a  back‐
       slash  before  the  single dash which follows the item name.  This syntax is used by
       the mandb(8) program to create a database of short descriptions  for  the  whatis(1)
       and  apropos(1)  commands.  (See lexgrog(1) for further details on the syntax of the
       NAME section.)

       For a list of other sections that might appear in a manual page, see man-pages(7).

   Fonts
       The commands to select the type face are:

       .B  Bold

       .BI Bold alternating with italics (especially useful for function specifications)

       .BR Bold alternating with Roman (especially useful for  referring  to  other  manual
           pages)

       .I  Italics

       .IB Italics alternating with bold

       .IR Italics alternating with Roman

       .RB Roman alternating with bold

       .RI Roman alternating with italics

       .SB Small alternating with bold

       .SM Small (useful for acronyms)

       Traditionally, each command can have up to six arguments, but the GNU implementation
       removes this limitation (you might still want to limit yourself to 6  arguments  for
       portability's  sake).  Arguments are delimited by spaces.  Double quotes can be used
       to specify an argument which contains spaces.  All of the arguments will be  printed
       next  to  each other without intervening spaces, so that the .BR command can be used
       to specify a word in bold followed by a mark of punctuation in Roman.  If  no  argu‐
       ments are given, the command is applied to the following line of text.

   Other macros and strings
       Below are other relevant macros and predefined strings.  Unless noted otherwise, all
       macros cause a break (end the current line of text).  Many of these  macros  set  or
       use the "prevailing indent."  The "prevailing indent" value is set by any macro with
       the parameter i below; macros may omit i in which case the current prevailing indent
       will  be  used.  As a result, successive indented paragraphs can use the same indent
       without respecifying the indent value.  A normal (nonindented) paragraph resets  the
       prevailing  indent value to its default value (0.5 inches).  By default, a given in‐
       dent is measured in ens; try to use ens or ems as units  for  indents,  since  these
       will  automatically  adjust  to  font size changes.  The other key macro definitions
       are:

   Normal paragraphs
       .LP      Same as .PP (begin a new paragraph).

       .P       Same as .PP (begin a new paragraph).

       .PP      Begin a new paragraph and reset prevailing indent.

   Relative margin indent
       .RS i    Start relative margin indent: moves the left margin i to the right (if i is
                omitted,  the prevailing indent value is used).  A new prevailing indent is
                set to 0.5 inches.  As a result, all following  paragraph(s)  will  be  in‐
                dented until the corresponding .RE.

       .RE      End  relative margin indent and restores the previous value of the prevail‐
                ing indent.

   Indented paragraph macros
       .HP i    Begin paragraph with a hanging indent (the first line of the  paragraph  is
                at  the  left  margin of normal paragraphs, and the rest of the paragraph's
                lines are indented).

       .IP x i  Indented paragraph with optional hanging tag.  If the tag x is omitted, the
                entire  following paragraph is indented by i.  If the tag x is provided, it
                is hung at the left margin before the following indented paragraph (this is
                just  like .TP except the tag is included with the command instead of being
                on the following line).  If the tag is too long, the  text  after  the  tag
                will  be  moved  down  to the next line (text will not be lost or garbled).
                For bulleted lists, use this macro with \(bu (bullet) or \(em (em dash)  as
                the tag, and for numbered lists, use the number or letter followed by a pe‐
                riod as the tag; this simplifies translation to other formats.

       .TP i    Begin paragraph with hanging tag.  The tag is given on the next  line,  but
                its results are like those of the .IP command.

   Hypertext link macros
       .UR url
              Insert a hypertext link to the URI (URL) url, with all text up to the follow‐
              ing .UE macro as the link text.

       .UE [trailer]
              Terminate the link text of the preceding .UR macro, with the optional trailer
              (if  present,  usually  a closing parenthesis and/or end-of-sentence punctua‐
              tion) immediately following.  For non-HTML output devices (e.g., man -Tutf8),
              the  link  text is followed by the URL in angle brackets; if there is no link
              text, the URL is printed as its own link text, surrounded by angle  brackets.
              (Angle  brackets  may  not be available on all output devices.)  For the HTML
              output device, the link text is hyperlinked to the URL; if there is  no  link
              text, the URL is printed as its own link text.

       These macros have been supported since GNU Troff 1.20 (2009-01-05) and Heirloom Doc‐
       tools Troff since 160217 (2016-02-17).

   Miscellaneous macros
       .DT      Reset tabs to default tab values (every  0.5  inches);  does  not  cause  a
                break.

       .PD d    Set  inter-paragraph  vertical distance to d (if omitted, d=0.4v); does not
                cause a break.

       .SS t    Subheading t (like .SH, but used for a subsection inside a section).

   Predefined strings
       The man package has the following predefined strings:

       \*R    Registration Symbol: ®

       \*S    Change to default font size

       \*(Tm  Trademark Symbol: ™

       \*(lq  Left angled double quote: “

       \*(rq  Right angled double quote: ”

   Safe subset
       Although technically man is a troff macro package, in  reality  a  large  number  of
       other  tools  process  man page files that don't implement all of troff's abilities.
       Thus, it's best to avoid some of troff's more exotic  abilities  where  possible  to
       permit  these  other  tools  to  work correctly.  Avoid using the various troff pre‐
       processors (if you must, go ahead and use tbl(1), but try to use the IP and TP  com‐
       mands  instead  for  two-column tables).  Avoid using computations; most other tools
       can't process them.  Use simple commands that are easy to translate  to  other  for‐
       mats.  The following troff macros are believed to be safe (though in many cases they
       will be ignored by translators): \", ., ad, bp, br, ce, de, ds, el, ie, if, fi,  ft,
       hy, ig, in, na, ne, nf, nh, ps, so, sp, ti, tr.

       You  may  also  use  many troff escape sequences (those sequences beginning with \).
       When you need to include the backslash character as normal text, use \e.  Other  se‐
       quences  you  may use, where x or xx are any characters and N is any digit, include:
       \', \`, \-, \., \", \%, \*x, \*(xx, \(xx, \$N, \nx, \n(xx, \fx,  and  \f(xx.   Avoid
       using the escape sequences for drawing graphics.

       Do not use the optional parameter for bp (break page).  Use only positive values for
       sp (vertical space).  Don't define a macro (de) with the same name  as  a  macro  in
       this  or  the mdoc macro package with a different meaning; it's likely that such re‐
       definitions will be ignored.  Every positive indent (in) should  be  paired  with  a
       matching  negative  indent  (although  you  should be using the RS and RE macros in‐
       stead).  The condition test (if,ie) should only have 't' or 'n'  as  the  condition.
       Only translations (tr) that can be ignored should be used.  Font changes (ft and the
       \f escape sequence) should only have the values 1, 2, 3, 4, R, I, B, P, or  CW  (the
       ft command may also have no parameters).

       If  you use capabilities beyond these, check the results carefully on several tools.
       Once you've confirmed that the additional capability is safe, let the maintainer  of
       this  document  know about the safe command or sequence that should be added to this
       list.

FILES
       /usr/share/groff/[*/]tmac/an.tmac
       /usr/man/whatis

NOTES
       By all means include full URLs (or URIs) in the text  itself;  some  tools  such  as
       man2html(1)  can automatically turn them into hypertext links.  You can also use the
       UR and UE macros to identify links to related information.  If you include URLs, use
       the  full URL (e.g., ⟨http://www.kernel.org⟩) to ensure that tools can automatically
       find the URLs.

       Tools processing these files should open the file and examine the  first  nonwhites‐
       pace  character.   A period (.) or single quote (') at the beginning of a line indi‐
       cates a troff-based file (such as man or mdoc).  A left angle bracket (<)  indicates
       an  SGML/XML-based  file  (such  as HTML or Docbook).  Anything else suggests simple
       ASCII text (e.g., a "catman" result).

       Many man pages begin with '\" followed by a space and a list of characters, indicat‐
       ing  how the page is to be preprocessed.  For portability's sake to non-troff trans‐
       lators we recommend that you avoid using anything other than tbl(1), and  Linux  can
       detect  that  automatically.  However, you might want to include this information so
       your man page can be handled by other (less capable) systems.  Here are the  defini‐
       tions of the preprocessors invoked by these characters:

       e  eqn(1)

       g  grap(1)

       p  pic(1)

       r  refer(1)

       t  tbl(1)

       v  vgrind(1)

BUGS
       Most  of  the  macros  describe  formatting (e.g., font type and spacing) instead of
       marking semantic content (e.g., this text is a reference to another page),  compared
       to formats like mdoc and DocBook (even HTML has more semantic markings).  This situ‐
       ation makes it harder to vary the man format for different media, to make  the  for‐
       matting  consistent for a given media, and to automatically insert cross-references.
       By sticking to the safe subset described above, it  should  be  easier  to  automate
       transitioning to a different reference page format in the future.

       The Sun macro TX is not implemented.

SEE ALSO
       apropos(1),  groff(1),  lexgrog(1),  man(1),  man2html(1), groff_mdoc(7), whatis(1),
       groff_man(7), groff_www(7), man-pages(7), mdoc(7)

COLOPHON
       This page is part of release 5.05 of the Linux man-pages project.  A description  of
       the  project, information about reporting bugs, and the latest version of this page,
       can be found at https://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/.

Linux                                    2019-03-06                                  MAN(7)
